# Open, Reusable Knowledge graph Annotator (ORKA)
Webservice and UI to allow users and curators to annotate any existing (RDF) graph. See the [software specification](https://dtl-fair.atlassian.net/wiki/display/TA/Triple+Annotator+and+NanoPub+Store+Software+Specification) for the architecture and design document. If you want to see ORKA without installing the software, please try our online demo at http://145.100.59.120:8080/demo/.

# Background

Manual curation of biomedical repositories is a well-established practice in the Life Science domain to improve the accuracy and reliability of data sources. An increasing amount of data is being made available as networks of concepts and relations also known as “knowledge graphs”. Currently, a tool or data source that exposes (a part of) a knowledge graph typically provides a built-in annotation facility to allow curators (or the general public) to make or suggest changes. However, such annotations are only used within the context of that particular tool and remain largely unusable and undiscoverable for other purposes.

For this reason we have proposed a tool called the Open, Reusable Knowledge graph Annotator (ORKA). ORKA is a small, embeddable web service and user interface to capture and publish an annotation event. A typical workflow looks like this: 1) a user or curator of a graph-based resource wants to report a defect or comment on a particular edge of the graph, 2) the resource provides a link which forwards the user to the ORKA user interface, 3) the user identifies himself by means of one of several open authentication options, 4) the user may now “edit” or comment on the particular graph edge, 5) the annotation is captured and stored and the user will be redirected to the interface of the original resource.

ORKA aims to support annotation from a wide range of data sources and tools that are either based on or can easily be mapped onto a knowledge graph. ORKA can be easily integrated with such resources by enabling a request to its straight-forward API. In a user interface this may look like an “Annotate now” link, button or context menu item on an association or assertion from the knowledge graph. The API requires minimally a pointer to the original data source and the selected knowledge graph assertion specified as a single triple (i.e. RDF URIs for subject, predicate and object). In subsequent steps, ORKA will collect the identity of the user and record the annotation activity as a self-contained, semantically interoperable digital object.

To identify the user, we envision a choice from a range of commonly used open authentication identity providers. In the current prototype, ORCID provides the main method of user authentication. We consider the identity of the annotator to be an essential part of the provenance of the annotation: firstly it can be used to rate or establish trust in the quality of a curator and secondly it is needed to reward proper credit to the user for his curation effort. 

In the annotation stage, the user currently has the option to change the predicate, add a free-text commentary, or both. We find that offering only a very limited set of annotation options helps to keep the annotation process quick and simple, yet still very expressive. Through the selection of an alternative predicate, the user suggests an improvement of the relation between the subject and object. For example a more specific predicate or a negation of the original predicate. Predicates may be chosen from a pre-loaded set, or from a specific ontology chosen by the user. The free-text box can be used to make any additional comments, and currently also serves as a catch-all to describe any other type of annotation: for example to support an assertion with additional evidence, or when a suitable predicate is not readily available.

Finally, ORKA captures the annotation, including provenance information (curator ID, date, original source triple and context) as a semantic digital object using the Nanopublication [] model and the Open Annotation Ontology []. The annotation object is then stored in an annotation repository, which is by default an open Nanopublication Store [] (ORKA can also be reconfigured to store to a private location). Subsequently, the user has the option to browse the repository or return to the original resource from which the annotation request to ORKA was made. Meanwhile, the original data source will receive a notification and link to the annotation object. Data sources may then apply different strategies to incorporate the annotations in their resource: some may first want to perform manual validation, or choose to accept annotations from a selected group of annotators automatically. We note that the semantic description of the annotations and its provenance promotes the reuse of annotations: third parties can access the (public) annotation stores and use them for their own purpose. Attribution can easily be achieved since Nanopublications are inherently citable.

We have designed ORKA as a generic service to annotate different types of graph-based data sources and produce persistent, reusable semantic digital annotation objects. To illustrate this, during the BioHackathon 2015 we developed a browser bookmarklet that allows annotation of any web-page with embedded RDFa statements. ORKA is currently being developed in the context of the ODEX4All project to enable annotation of its core knowledge platform. Initial use-cases have indicated a need for additional features, such as annotation of the object of a statement as well as specifying evidence for an annotation (for example by citing published literature). Supporting additional open authentication methods will lower the entry barrier for potential users even further. In the future we hope to integrate ORKA in other resources and work out scenarios to show how generically reusable annotations result in richer, more accurate data sources and how this helps knowledge discovery in the Life Science domain.
